All right.
So how can we identify when we need to use the chain rule versus when we don't.
I call this section a chain or not.
So I don't want you to randomly guess oh you know maybe this is the chain rule.
Maybe not.
I want you to have something to use so that you can determine right away whether you need to use the
chain rule or you don't.
And the key is this.
It's an inner function
and this inner function is not x.
All right.
So for example.
So on this side I'm going to put examples of functions that require the chain rule to find the derivative
and end this right on this side.
I'll give you examples of functions where you don't need to use the chain rule.
So here chain and here not chain.
All right so not chain an example that I gave you already is f of x equals x cubed.
Why don't we need to use a chain rule.
Well what is the inner function the inner function in theory is X right.
Because you have first X and then you have to cube it.
However this inner function cannot be x.
It needs to be something else.
So for example this we did not change but this we do chain of X equals to X Minus One cubed.
So you see the difference.
This one is just x cubed.
But this one is 2 x minus 1 cute.
Here we have an inner function which is 2 x minus 1.
So when I say inner function I mean the function that's inside.
In this case this 2 X Minus One is inside of the cubed function.
Let me repeat that again.
If there is an inner function then you need to use the chain rule and in this case it is very clear
that we have an inner function that's not X it is 2 x minus 1.
So let's say we have this cube function we're plugging in to X Minus One into this cube function.
All right.
And during my years of tutoring I've noticed that the best way for a student to learn the chain rule
is through examples.
So let's do more of those.
So if I have of X equals square root of x Again I don't need to use a chain rule because square root
of x is x to the one half.
And here I could easily do the power rule.
Right.
Because this is a power function.
And what we did in the previous slide which is bring the dictator down.
We subtract one etc. etc..
However if we put something else under this route that's not an x then we need to use the chain rule
for example.
Square root of x squared minus 16 all of a sudden we do not have a square root of x by itself.
We have x squared minus 16 under the square root.
So what is the inner function inner function is x squared minus 16.
And let me go ahead and start putting the inner functions next to these functions.
So you know what they are.
And by the way in the chain will the enter functions are denoted by U SO U is the inner function.
Right inner functions are you.
So the inner function for this one is to X Minus One because this 2 X Minus One is within this other
cube function right.
So inner function is 2 x minus 1.
Next what does the inner function here.
Inner function is x squared minus 16 because this x squared minus 16 is wrapped by this square root
so you equals x squared.
Mine is 16.
So if you see a function wrapped around another function that is a composition like we see in these
two examples.
This function is wrapped by the three and this function is wrapped by the square root.
Let's do a couple more.
So if I have this function f of x equals x to the tenth again no need to use the chain rule.
This is just a power function and you can just use the power rule.
Right.
You can use a dictator mnemonic and get your derivative.
However on the other hand if you have half of X equals
x plus 1 to the tenth all of a sudden we have a composition of functions this X plus one is being plugged
in into this function that elevates it to the tenth power.
Right.
So what is the inner function for this one.
Remember the inner function is wrapped around another function.
So in this case it is the X plus one.
All right.
Let's do another example.
X equals
two.
So the X and we actually haven't done this yet.
This is called an exponential function even though we haven't done it.
I can tell you that we do not need to use any sort of chain rule because you're just elevating to the
X power.
Right.
So the input is X However when you have something like this to the x squared minus 3 x so the exponent
is x squared minus 3 x then all of a sudden we need to use a chain rule.
Why.
Because we have one function inside another.
What does the inner function again remember the inner function is wrapped around another.
We have this too.
So this power.
So first we need to get this power and then we can apply to the two.
That means that the inner function is x squared minus 3 x
so this should be making sense by this point right.
Whenever you see a function and it's wrapped around another then you know you have a composition and
we can get the inner function which is the function that's wrapped around the other.
So in all of these cases you can do what you would typically do with X that would be incomplete for
the chain rule.
There's an extra step and we'll learn how to do the chain rule and just a second.
Let's do one more example.
All right so we have this function one over x to the seven.
It looks kind of weird though right.
So do you remember how we do this the way we do this is we take this x to the 7th and we bring it to
the top by flipping the sign of the exponents.
So this becomes X to the negative seventh.
All right.
And after this is just a regular power function and you can just use the power rule as you can see for
all of these examples.
The inner function quote unquote is X right x to the third X so the one have X to the tenth to to the
x x to the negative 7 etc. etc. in all of these examples however it's never x by itself.
That's why I mentioned that here.
You're not going to have x by itself to X minus 1 x squared minus 16 expletive 1 x squared minus 3 x
etc. etc..
So that is the main difference.
This one only has X and these ones have more than X..
They have X and more stuff.
All right.
So like I said here we can do the power rule with no problem but if we get the chain rule version
let's say that we have
x three plus four to the negative seven.
Again all of a sudden we don't have x by itself.
We have x cubed plus four.
So if you want to get the derivative of this you need to use the chain rule.
So I think you know by this point that the inner function would be execute plus for
all right.
So let me separate this here.
So you might be thinking.
All right.
So we already know when to use the chain rule.
So the question is what is the chain rule and how do we apply it.
And we'll get to that in just a second.
Just before I want to show you something.
So let's say that you want to get the derivative of this function over here.
Right.
X plus 1 to the tenth.
So in theory you could go ahead and multiply X plus 1 by itself 10 times and after that you're going
to get like this huge huge thing that you have to simplify.
So for example x plus 1 to the tenth equals x plus 1 times exploits won times X was won.
Times X was won etc. etc. until you do that 10 times.
All right so you're multiplying X plus 1 by itself 10 times.
Not only that after you write it like this.
Guess what you have to foil every single thing.
So you have to foil these two and then you have to foil these two.
And then you have to do that all over the place.
And that is extremely annoying.
The beautiful thing about the chain rule is that it allows us to get the derivative of stuff like this
very quickly.
You don't have to multiply this thing all over the place just to be able to get the derivative.
You can quickly use the chain rule and do it right away.
So once you learn it it's a very powerful tool that you can use to find the derivative of composition
of functions.
Nobody wants to multiply exploits one 10 times and then get the derivative.
That would be ridiculous.
Even for example 2 x minus 1 3 times even that is a lot of work with the chain rule.
We could do it right away.
So how do we apply the chain rule.
Let's get into it.